---
title: 'Foundations in Digital Humanities 2.10'
subtitle: 'Map Systems'
author:
 - Frederic Kaplan

# Don't change the following lines
header-includes:
- \usepackage{fancyhdr}
- \pagestyle{fancy}
- \fancyfoot[L]{-release-version-}
output: pdf_document

---

# Map Systems

## Theses

1) Maps are characterised by a long history of innovations from triangulation to Geographical Information Systems

2) It is important to model these changes in order to organise maps as systems.

## Definitions

Maps are memories. But memories of what ?

- A map is an abstraction of concrete territory
- A map is the result of coordinated sequences of operations. As operations get more sophisticated the map as a memory system changes. Ideally we would like to be able to retrieve all the operations “stored” in the map.

The map as abstraction lead to to define the notion of Map Systems.

The map as a store of operations will be treated as a special case of a generic approch to the generation of shapes in chapter FDH 2-12. 

### Map Systems

> Definition : Map systems 
>
> Map systems articulate digital images with geometrical approximations of Places. 

A single map system can include many digital iamges and other course a lot of Places. 

### Place

We can define a Place in the following way 

> Definition: Place
>
> Non-ambigous symbolic area, typically defined in relation with other small or bigger areas. 

- Names

- Type (Natural geography, populated place, administrative unit i.e cadastral parcel)

- Localisation in time (points, surface, volume)

- Unique ID

### Gazeeteers and Geocoding services

Dictionary of places. 

- Google API. 
- Geonames, 
-  http://whgazetteer.org

Geocoding services

- Geopy : geopy is a Python client for several popular geocoding web services. geopy makes it easy for Python developers to locate the coordinates of addresses, cities, countries, and landmarks across the globe using third-party geocoders and other data sources. https://geopy.readthedocs.io/en/stable/

### Concrete Shape

> Definition: Concrete Shape
>
> Concrete shape is the actual and precise frontier of the place on the territory at a given moment in time

France is defined a series of diachronic concrete shapes. 

Concrete shape change over time. Evolution of concrete shapes can be modelled at a very high precision (month or day). 

### Geometries

> Definition: Geometry
>
> A geometry is logical combination of polygons in relation to another surface (document map, GIS layer)

Each concrete shape can be approximate by different geometries that differ in terms of scale and ways of modelling (lines, polygons) or more generally logical combination of polygons  (to deal with wholes and disjoint shapes)

Each polygon is defined by a set of a (control) points. 

Remark : Some of these control points can be engaged in homologous pairs (linked with other points in other documents) and therefore associated with pivot points (see below). We can in such cases talk about homologous geometries. 

In principles, geometries could also be defined by raster contour, splines, geometrical definition, etc. 

### Pivot Point

Homologous Pair and Pivot Points play a crucial role in Map Systems. Let's recall their definition

> Definition: Homologous Points and Pivot Point
>
> Homologous points are corresponding pairs of points in two digital images identified as the representation of the same underlying physical point, called pivot point, from two perspectives.

## History of mapping technologies

To be capable of processing maps from different periods, one must well understand the history of mapping… and how to translate the information contain in old maps using the logics of recent Geographical Information Systems.

### Odometry

How did Leonardo da Vinci built the first aerial view of a city in 1502 ?

### Triangulation

Snellius (1580-1626)

### Coordinate systems

Meridian. Paris Observatory

Cassini Map

### Definition of the metric system

Measure of the Meridian by Mechain et Delambre

Definition of the metric system

### Technical drawing and projection

### Cadaster

First cadaster in 1726 in Geneva

Napoleon Cadaster

Generalization in the 19th century.

### Aerial photography

Nadar.

The Sampling vs Modelling duality

## Geographical Information Systems

A Geographical Information system is a particular instance of a map system. 

### Vector Data

### Raster Data

### Coordinate Systems

The earth is not a sphere or an ellispoid

Level of see is not a constant measure for point 0 in altitude.

It is changing over years, during the day and is not equal at a given moment in different point of the Earth.

Projection systems

- Mercator
- Lambert
- WGS84

If you want both correct shapes and area you must work on local coordianate system.

### Layers

One of the central concept of current GIS are layers. 

### BIM

Extension of the concept of GIS to each building 

## Summary

Maps are organised information systems. Starting from contemporary geographic information system it is possible to go back in time and redocument more ancient systems.

## In the next chapter

We will see how to process maps. 

## Questions from Students
How hard is it to go from one coordinate system to another?
## Further reading

- Book on Cartography

