---
title: 'Foundations in Digital Humanities 2.12'
subtitle: 'Object and Architecture Systems'
author:
 - Frederic Kaplan

# Don't change the following lines
header-includes:
- \usepackage{fancyhdr}
- \pagestyle{fancy}
- \fancyfoot[L]{-release-version-}
output: pdf_document

---

# Object and Architecture Systems

## Theses

Almost all man-made objects contain parts that are similar. Almost all man-made are parts of larger systems. What is the best way to describe their structure and evolution?

1) They can be described as grammatical systems

2) Objects and architecture can be described as the result of sequences of operations

## Object systems

- Jean Baudrillard, Les système des objets
- Gilbert Simondon, Du mode d'existence des objets techniques
- Jean-Hugues Barthélemry. Simondon ou l'encyclopedisme génétique
- John Ziman, Technological innovation as an Evolutionnary process

Evolutionary appraoches :

- Viewing evolution object like evolution of natural beings
- Lamarckian evolution
- Variation selection
- Fitness landscape

Concretisation processes (Simondon)

- Regularly associated components tend to be integrated with one another.
- Only living processes are fully concrete.
- New Encyclopedism : The new Encyclopedism is "genetic", in the sense that it thinks the genesis of everything.

## Architecture systems

### Architectural Grammars

Why are architecture grammatical systems ?

- Case study: Brunswick Square (1830)
- Case study : Venetetian Minor Architecture

Most descriptions of systems and parts are descriptive but not causal.

### Multiscale Design Patterns

- Christopher Alexander, Sara Ishikawa, Murray Silverstein, A Pattern Language. Town Buildings Construction, Oxford University Press

From Wikipedia :

The book creates a new language, what the authors call a pattern language derived from timeless entities called patterns.

"All 253 patterns together form a language." (page xxxv of the introduction)

Patterns describe a problem and then offer a solution

[…] each pattern represents our current best guess as to what arrangement of the physical environment will work to solve the problem presented. The empirical questions center on the problem—does it occur and is it felt in the way we describe it?—and the solution—does the arrangement we propose solve the problem? And the asterisks represent our degree of faith in these hypotheses. But of course, no matter what the asterisks say, the patterns are still hypotheses, all 253 of them—and are, therefore, all tentative, all free to evolve under the impact of new experience and observation.

— Christopher Alexander et al., A Pattern Language, p. xv

Some Patterns focus on material

We believe ultra-lightweight concrete is one of the most-fundamental bulk materials of the future.

— Christopher Alexander et al., A Pattern Language, p. 958

Others on life experience

The street cafe provides a unique setting, special to cities: a place people can sit lazily, legitimately, be on view, and watch the world go by […]. Encourage local cafes to spring up in each neighborhood. Make them intimate places, with several rooms, open to a busy path, so people can sit with coffee or a drink, and watch the world go by. Build the front of the cafe so a set of tables stretch out of the cafe, right into the street.

— Christopher Alexander et al., A Pattern Language, p. 437,439

253 Patterns : INDEPENDENT REGIONS 2. THE DISTRIBUTION OF TOWNS 3. CITY COUNTRY FINGERS 4. AGRICULTURAL VALLEYS 5. LACE OF COUNTRY STREETS 6. COUNTRY TOWNS 7. THE COUNTRYSIDE 8. MOSAIC OF SUBCULTURES 9. SCATTERED WORK 10. MAGIC OF THE CITY 11. LOCAL TRANSPORT AREAS 12. COMMUNITY OF 7000 13. SUBCULTURE BOUNDARY 14. IDENTIFIABLE NEIGHBORHOOD 15. NEIGHBORHOOD BOUNDARY 16. WEB OF PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION 17. RING ROADS 18. NETWORK OF LEARNING 19. WEB OF SHOPPING 20. MINI-BUSES 21. FOUR-STORY LIMIT 22. NINE PER CENT PARKING 23. PARALLEL ROADS 24. SACRED SITES 25. ACCESS TO WATER 26. LIFE CYCLE 27. MEN AND WOMEN 28. ECCENTRIC NUCLEUS 29. DENSITY RINGS 30. ACTIVITY NODES 31. PROMENADE 32. SHOPPING STREET 33. NIGHT LIFE 34. INTERCHANGE 35. HOUSEHOLD MIX 36. DEGREES OF PUBLICNESS 37. HOUSE CLUSTER 38. ROW HOUSES 39. HOUSING HILL 40. OLD PEOPLE EVERYWHERE 41. WORK COMMUNITY 42. INDUSTRIAL RIBBON 43. UNIVERSITY AS A MARKETPLACE 44. LOCAL TOWN HALL 45. NECKLACE OF COMMUNITY PROJECTS 46. MARKET OF MANY SHOPS 47. HEALTH CENTER 48. HOUSING INBETWEEN 49. LOOPED LOCAL ROADS 50. T JUNCTIONS 51. GREEN STREETS 52. NETWORK OF PATHS AND CARS 53. MAIN GATEWAYS 54. ROAD CROSSING 55. RAISED WALK 56. BIKE PATHS AND RACKS 57. CHILDREN IN THE CITY 58. CARNIVAL 59. QUIET BACKS 60. ACCESSIBLE GREEN 61. SMALL PUBLIC SQUARES 62. HIGH PLACES 63. DANCING IN THE STREET 64. POOLS AND STREAMS 65. BIRTH PLACES 66. HOLY GROUND 67. COMMON LAND 68. CONNECTED PLAY 69. PUBLIC OUTDOOR ROOM 70. GRAVE SITES 71. STILL WATER 72. LOCAL SPORTS 73. ADVENTURE PLAYGROUND 74. ANIMALS 75. THE FAMILY 76. HOUSE FOR A SMALL FAMILY 77. HOUSE FOR A COUPLE 78. HOUSE FOR ONE PERSON 79. YOUR OWN HOME 80. SELF-GOVERNING WORKSHOPS AND OFFICES 81. SMALL SERVICES WITHOUT RED TAPE 82. OFFICE CONNECTIONS 83. MASTER AND APPRENTICES 84. TEENAGE SOCIETY 85. SHOPFRONT SCHOOLS 86. CHILDREN’S HOME 87. INDIVIDUALLY OWNED SHOPS 88. STREET CAFE 89. CORNER GROCERY 90. BEER HALL 91. TRAVELER'S INN 92. BUS STOP 93. FOOD STANDS 94. SLEEPING IN PUBLIC 95. BUILDING COMPLEX 96. NUMBER OF STORIES 97. SHIELDED PARKING 98. CIRCULATION REALMS 99. MAIN BUILDING 100. PEDESTRIAN STREET 101. BUILDING THOROUGHFARE 102. FAMILY OF ENTRANCES 103. SMALL PARKING LOTS 104. SITE REPAIR 105. SOUTH FACING OUTDOORS 106. POSITIVE OUTDOOR SPACE 107. WINGS OF LIGHT 108. CONNECTED BUILDINGS 109. LONG THIN HOUSE 110. MAIN ENTRANCE 111. HALF-HIDDEN GARDEN 112. ENTRANCE TRANSITION 113. CAR CONNECTION 114. HIERARCHY OF OPEN SPACE 115. COURTYARDS WHICH LIVE 116. CASCADE OF ROOFS 117. SHELTERING ROOF 118. ROOF GARDEN 119. ARCADES 120. PATHS AND GOALS 121. PATH SHAPE 122. BUILDING FRONTS 123. PEDESTRIAN DENSITY 124. ACTIVITY POCKETS 125. STAIR SEATS 126. SOMETHING ROUGHLY IN THE MIDDLE 127. INTIMACY GRADIENT 128. INDOOR SUNLIGHT 129. COMMON AREAS AT THE HEART 130. ENTRANCE ROOM 131. THE FLOW THROUGH ROOMS 132. SHORT PASSAGES 133. STAIRCASE AS A STAGE 134. ZEN VIEW 135. TAPESTRY OF LIGHT AND DARK 136. COUPLE'S REALM 137. CHILDREN'S REALM 138. SLEEPING TO THE EAST 139. FARMHOUSE KITCHEN 140. PRIVATE TERRACE ON THE STREET 141. A ROOM OF ONE'S OWN 142. SEQUENCE OF SITTING SPACES 143. BED CLUSTER 144. BATHING ROOM 145. BULK STORAGE 146. FLEXIBLE OFFICE SPACE 147. COMMUNAL EATING 148. SMALL WORK GROUPS 149. RECEPTION WELCOMES YOU 150. A PLACE TO WAIT 151. SMALL MEETING ROOMS 152. HALF-PRIVATE OFFICE 153. ROOMS TO RENT 154. TEENAGER'S COTTAGE 155. OLD AGE COTTAGE 156. SETTLED WORK 157. HOME WORKSHOP 158. OPEN STAIRS 159. LIGHT ON TWO SIDES OF EVERY ROOM 160. BUILDING EDGE 161. SUNNY PLACE 162. NORTH FACE 163. OUTDOOR ROOM 164. STREET WINDOWS 165. OPENING TO THE STREET 166. GALLERY SURROUND 167. SIX-FOOT BALCONY 168. CONNECTION TO THE EARTH 169. TERRACED SLOPE 170. FRUIT TREES 171. TREE PLACES 172. GARDEN GROWING WILD 173. GARDEN WALL 174. TRELLISED WALK 175. GREENHOUSE 176. GARDEN SEAT 177. VEGETABLE GARDEN 178. COMPOST 179. ALCOVES 180. WINDOW PLACE 181. THE FIRE 182. EATING ATMOSPHERE 183. WORKSPACE ENCLOSURE 184. COOKING LAYOUT 185. SITTING CIRCLE 186. COMMUNAL SLEEPING 187. MARRIAGE BED 188. BED ALCOVE 189. DRESSING ROOM 190. CEILING HEIGHT VARIETY 191. THE SHAPE OF INDOOR SPACE 192. WINDOWS OVERLOOKING LIFE 193. HALF-OPEN WALL 194. INTERIOR WINDOWS 195. STAIRCASE VOLUME 196. CORNER DOORS 197. THICK WALLS 198. CLOSETS BETWEEN ROOMS 199. SUNNY COUNTER 200. OPEN SHELVES 201. WAIST-HIGH SHELF 202. BUILT-IN SEATS 203. CHILD CAVES 204. SECRET PLACE 205. STRUCTURE FOLLOWS SOCIAL SPACES 206. EFFICIENT STRUCTURE 207. GOOD MATERIALS 208. GRADUAL STIFFENING 209. ROOF LAYOUT 210. FLOOR AND CEILING LAYOUT 211. THICKENING THE OUTER WALLS 212. COLUMNS AT THE CORNERS 213. FINAL COLUMN DISTRIBUTION 214. ROOT FOUNDATIONS 215. GROUND FLOOR SLAB 216. BOX COLUMNS 217. PERIMETER BEAMS 218. WALL MEMBRANES 219. FLOOR-CEILING VAULTS 220. ROOF VAULTS 221. NATURAL DOORS AND WINDOWS 222. LOW SILL 223. DEEP REVEALS 224. LOW DOORWAY 225. FRAMES AS THICKENED EDGES 226. COLUMN PLACE 227. COLUMN CONNECTION 228. STAIR VAULT 229. DUCT SPACE 230. RADIANT HEAT 231. DORMER WINDOWS 232. ROOF CAPS 233. FLOOR SURFACE 234. LAPPED OUTSIDE WALLS 235. SOFT INSIDE WALLS 236. WINDOWS WHICH OPEN WIDE 237. SOLID DOORS WITH GLASS 238. FILTERED LIGHT 239. SMALL PANES 240. HALF-INCH TRIM 241. SEAT SPOTS 242. FRONT DOOR BENCH 243. SITTING WALL 244. CANVAS ROOFS 245. RAISED FLOWERS 246. CLIMBING PLANTS 247. PAVING WITH CRACKS BETWEEN THE STONES 248. SOFT TILE AND BRICK 249. ORNAMENT 250. WARM COLORS 251. DIFFERENT CHAIRS 252. POOLS OF LIGHT 253. THINGS FROM YOUR LIFE

Adaptation to the software industry : Software Design patterns

### Elements

Rem Koohlass, Éléments of architecture

From large exhibition at Venice biennale in 2014

- Floor
- Ceiling
- Roof
- Door
- Wall
- Stairs
- Toilet
- Window
- Façade
- Balcony
- Corridor
- Fireplace
- Ramp
- Escalator
- Elevator

## Generative models

### Generality of generative approaches

The main idea behind generative modelling is to describe the way how an object is built, rather than to describe the result of the construction process.

Case study : Gothic cathedral

- The central idea of Gothic Architecture is to dissolve the static supporting stone structures to remove all the massiveness from the stone.
- Small detail are everywhere.
- Difficult to scan. Occlusion problems.

### Generative theory of Shape

- Leyton, Process Grammar.
- Leyton, A Generative Theory of Shape
- Leyton, Symetry, Causality, Mind
- Leyton, Shape as Memory.

#### Shape is memory storage

A shape is the consequence of various deforming actions (protusion, indentation, squashing, resistance)

These actions occurred in the past, yet one is able to infer this history from the shape itself.

The conventional foundations of geometry state that the proper objects of geometry are invariants (those feature that do not retain past history)

In constrast, geometry could be the study of those features that retain information about the past.

Shape can be viewed as the means by which past actions are stored.

Shape = Memory Storage

Invariants cannot act as memory stores

#### Symmetry and asymmetry

Asymmetry is the memory that processes leave on objects. Memory is stored in asymmetries

Memory is erased by Symmetries. Symetry is the absence of process memory.

Recoverning the past by reconstucting sequences of asymmetries and symmetries

Platonistic solids are memoryless objects. Object zero.

#### Curvature as memory storage

Symmetry in complex shapes

Symmetry-Curvature Duality: Any section of a curve that has one and only one curvature extremum has one and only one symmetry axis. This ax’s is forced to terminate at the extremum itself.

Sixteen extrema imply sixteen symmetry axes

#### Interaction principles

Interaction principles : Symmetry axes are the directions along which processes are hypothesised as most likely to have acted.

Four actions

- Protusion (M+)
- Indentation (m-)
- Resistance (M-)
- Squashing (m+)

Inferred history of a shape with 4 extrema

Inferred history of a shape with 6 extrema

#### Process Grammar

Given a shape at two stages of its development how it is possible to infer the interventing shape evolution?

The six rules of the Process grammar

Cm+ : squashing continues till it indents.
 m+ -> 0 m- 0
CM- : internal resistance continues till it protrudes.
M- -> 0 M+ 0
BM+ : a protrusion bifurcates; e.g. a nodule becomes a lobe.
M+ ->  M+ m+ M+
Bm- : an indentation bifurcates; e.g. an inlet becomes a bay.
m- -> m- M- m-
Bm+ : a protrusion is introduced.
m+ ->  m+ M+ m+
BM- : an indentation is introduced.
M- ->  M- m- M-

#### History minimisation principles

The inferred process-history contains minimal distinguishability.
This means that
- The history is composed of a minimal set of distinguishable actions
- The change induced by an action is minimal.

#### Transfer

A group is a complete system of transformation
Example
(1) Rotations. The complete system of rotations around a circle
(2) Translations. The complete system of translations along a line
(3) Deformations. The complete system of deformation of an object

The condition for a collection to be complete means satisfying three properties
(1) Closure. For any two transformation in the group, their combination is also in the group
(2) Identify element. The collection of transformations must contain the “null” transformation
(3) Inverse. For any transformation in the group, its inverse transformation is also in the group.

Generating a shape by Transfer

1. Create a single point in space
2. Transfer the point around space by rotating it thus producing a circle
3. Transfer the circle through space by translating it thus producing a straight cylinder
4. Transfer a straight cylinder onto the deformed cylinder by deforming it.

There is no actual object. Only actions

G1 (T) G2
Rotations (T) Translations
Fiber Group (T) Control Group

(T) is a wreath product

Relation to architecture :

There are only three kinds of actions that preserve shape and size : Translation, rotations and reflections.

Classical regularity

(1) The generative actions are structured as a n-fold hierarchy of transfer : G1 (T) G2 (T) … (T) Gn

(2) Each level can be specified buy one parameter (e.g. angle around a circle, distance along a line). This parameter represents the paremater of time.

(3) Each level consists of a group of actions that preserve shape and size (isometries)

Case study

- Palladian Villas

The standard architectural design process moves forward by successive symmetry-breaking (asymmetry-building)

The process is a sequence of "unfolding”

Any complex shape is unfolded from a maximally collapsed version of itself called an “alignment kernel”.

#### Ethical consequences

Life is asymmetry

- The body is not symmetric (compared to objects that are actually symmetric e.g. a sphere)
- Individual limbs are not symmetric
- Organs are not symmetric
- Cells are not symmetric
- DNA molecules are asymmetric.

Death is symmetrization

- The function of living are to maintain these asymmetries.
- With the decay process, memory is erased.
- Inference become impossible

Political symmetrisation of memories

- For prisoners
- For refugees
- For citizens in general through standardisation

Mass destruction of memory?

The historical ethic : “The historic ethic is the commitment to reveal the fullest, the history of an entity - a person, a culture, the animate and inanimate environment, oneself and to the interact with the entity by virtue of its fullest history”

## Summary

At a first level of analysis, objects and architecture seems to be composed of reoccurring patterns. The ultimate goal is to design a fully generative theory for these patterns replacing every shape as a series of actions. Shape analysis would then become only a question of history recovery.

## In the next chapter

We will concretely model and process shapes to try to extract their history.

## Further reading

- Jean Baudrillard, Les système des objets
- Gilbert Simondon, Du mode d'existence des objets techniques
- John Ziman, Technological innovation as an Evolutionnary process
- Rem Koohlass, Éléments of architecture
- Christopher Alexander, Sara Ishikawa, Murray Silverstein, A Pattern Language. Town Buildings Construction, Oxford University Press
- Leyton, Process Grammar.
- Leyton, A Generative Theory of Shape
- Leyton, Symetry, Causality, Mind
- Leyton, Shape as Memory.
