---
title: 'Foundations in Digital Humanities 2.13'
subtitle: 'Object and Architecture Processing'
author:
 - Frederic Kaplan

# Don't change the following lines
header-includes:
- \usepackage{fancyhdr}
- \pagestyle{fancy}
- \fancyfoot[L]{-release-version-}
output: pdf_document

---

# Object and Architecture Processing

## Theses

Can you understand architectures and objects sufficiently to parse them like with we parse documents and maps ?

Can we extract the history of building or an object?

Can we recreate object and building in a realistic manner based on sequence of actions?

1) Two kinds of processing can be done : Modelling or sampling

2) Procedural methods permits to generate families of cities and architecture following specific rules

3) The challenge is to combine sampling methods with procedural approaches. 

## The great confusion of the World of 3D processing

The 3D world is yet unstructured. Many repository, tools, formats linked with many kinds of activities. 

### Catalogs of 3D objects

- MegaScan https://quixel.com/megascans/home
- SketchFab https://sketchfab.com/
- 3DMR : This project is a repository for 3D models, and their metadata, for use by the OpenStreetMap community for improving the quality of 3D rendering of maps https://gitlab.com/n42k/3dmr

### Environments

- ArcGIS, 3DCityDB
- Maya, Houdini
- Unreal Engine, Unity

### Formats and Standards

- PLY - Polygon File Format, paulbourke.net/dataformats/ply/

- LAZ - format of LIDAR Data. 

- 3DS - 3D format

- ASC - Format of the SRTM -Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM),  a NASA mission conducted in 2000 to obtain elevation data for most of the world.

- KML - Keyhole Markup Language

- BIM formats - Buildings Information Modelling

  

## Modelling and Sampling

Modelling vs Sampling : 

Drawing vs Photography

Map vs Satellite

Vector vs Raster

Synthesis vs Analysis

## Sampling Methods

### Different acquistion techniques

- Finding a compromise between time and precision. 
- Using standard camera or dedicated scanners (for instance LIDAR)
- Iterated Scanning
- Visualisation of the scans

#### Topographic Radar - Radiation based

\- Requires expansive campaign - space mission

\- Metric and accurate

\- Sparse cloud points

\- Large coverage

\- Easily available

Provide topographic model at Earth scale. 

#### Lidar - Radiation based

\- Expansive devices

\- Accurate GPS and IMU

\- Metric and Accurate

\- Dense cloud points

Provides models at regions, cities, building scales 

#### Photogrammetry

- Principles of Photogrammetry already seen in previous courses. First odometry, then densification. 
- Graph of adjancy based on homologous points
- Requires simple cameras
- ... But large amount of computation
- Cleaning and alignment 
- ..  But Simple to maintain 

Provide models at multiple scales

Core adventage 

- Usage with ancient photograph (no need to rescan)
- Usage with video
- Usage with models

Geodetic registration needed 

- Photogrammetric dense models aligned in a set of geodetic cartesian coordinate
- Based on homologous points
- Rigid or flexible transformation (depend on the confidence on the 3D structure)

Registration permits to restore metric factor. 

Images must be conserved with photogrammetric models as they permits to attach other images in the adjancy matrix and extend the image system (cf course on Image systems)

## Cloud Point processing and indexing

### Problems with Cloud Points

Problems with cloud points

- Monolitics 
- Difficulty of manipulation, store, manage, compare. 
- Do not comply with some of cadastral requierement 
- Nice to have but not necessary. 

The resolution between the models and their scale can be quantified by considering the following relationship:

r = log10 (amplitude / resolution)

where the amplitude corresponds to the extent of the model - the range of the representation of reality it gives - and where the resolution gives the average separation between the points of the model. For example, the model of a street of a hundred metres with points separated, on average, by one centimetre gives an r value of 4. A topographical model of a hundred kilometres with an average separation of its points of 10 metres thus gives the same r value. A model of the whole Earth with a point separation of one centimetre can be associated with an r value of about 9.6. In comparison, the SRTM model with a point separation of about 30 metres leads to an r value of about 6.1, thus making it a purely topographic model, clearly neglecting details.

### Vectorization and Polygonization

Vector models are priviledged for territory representation, but ambigous in many ways

Polygon models can be seen as a specific "type" of vector model. Indeed, they can be defined as a set of surfaces defined by links between vertices, as in previous models. A purely polygonal model is thus a vector model with only triangles - allowing any type of surface to be constructed. Less used than vector models. Used for 3D city models.

Polygonization algorihtm can transform cloud points into polygons

Practical case study. :Using a Photogrammetric software (e.g. RealityCapture)

### Local indexing : OcTree

https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Octree

Wikipedia : An **octree** is a [tree data structure](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tree_data_structure) in which each [internal node](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internal_node) has exactly eight [children](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Child_node). Octrees are most often used to partition a [three-dimensional space](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Three-dimensional_space) by [recursively subdividing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Recursive_subdivision) it into eight octants. Octrees are the three-dimensional analog of [quadtrees](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quadtree). The name is formed from *oct* + *tree*, but note that it is normally written "*octree*" with only one "t". Octrees are often used in [3D graphics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/3D_graphics) and 3D [game engines](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Game_engine).

The use of octrees for [3D computer graphics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/3D_computer_graphics) was pioneered by Donald Meagher at [Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rensselaer_Polytechnic_Institute), described in a 1980 report "Octree Encoding: A New Technique for the Representation, Manipulation and Display of Arbitrary 3-D Objects by Computer",[[1\]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Octree#cite_note-1) for which he holds a 1995 patent (with a 1984 [priority date](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Priority_right)) "High-speed image generation of complex solid objects using octree encoding" [[2\]](

### Global Indexing 

Hierachical indexing space and time.

Extension of the OcTree idea to the entire surface of the Earth.

Problem with adaptation of a cube to a spherical coordinate system

Any cube as now a unique index number. 

Any subcube adds an additional digit (between 1 and 8) for greater precision.

Same thing can be done with time.

This permits a total ordering of measures (cf. the problem we had with partial ordering of images in image systems)

Historical data can be realigned with recent data. Lidar with photogrammetry.

Polygons and vectors can be included in the grid by considering their extremetes. 

Ex. Eratosthene server

## Photo Modelling

Capture strategy.

Documenting geometry. Documenting textures. 

Parallel acquisition

Strategy depends on whether one documents an object, a surface, an open or close space

Geometric rectification

Modelling volumes by transformation : Translation, rotation, scaling applied to volumes, face, vertexes, points. 

Modelling profiles

Deformation of a profile : degree 1, 2, 3, ..

Modelling of a shape by rotating a profile

## Procedural Modelling

L-Systems by Aristid Lidenmayer

Chomsky formal grammar

Pascal Mueller 

- Procedural production of street network
- Procedural modelling of Facade. Facade parsing is the process of decomposing a facade into its constituent components, e.g., windows, entries, doors, and stair.
- Integrative simulation of 4D Cities

CityEngine (ARGIS)

- Use in the film industry : Zootopia. A imaginary city produced out of rules

Houdini

- Procedural for games and film industry

Case Study : Venice 1808 Procedural 

## Inverse Procedural Modelling

1. Scan

2. Segment in elements

3. Fit with models in catalogs 
4. Generate adapted models based on footprint

5. Compare with reality

The real objective would be to associate with sampled model of reality a fully procedural model that could model each building as a history of operations. 

Unpacking the memory store of each building. 



## Summary

The world can be now sampled at massive scale. Procedural modelling approaches have made great progresses.

The core challenge is now to link the two approach to automatically derive a procedural description of the world

## Further reading

- Livio de Luca, La Photomodelisation architecturale, Eyrolles

- S. Tavakkol, C. Shahabi, F. Han, and R. Kiveris, “Piaget: A probabilistic inference approach for geolocating historical buildings.”.

- T. Weyand, I. Kostrikov, and J. Philbin, “Planet-photo geolocation with convolutional neural networks,” in European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 37–55, Springer, 2016.

- Pascal Muellers papers : Procedual modeling of cities, Image-based procedural modeling of facade, Integrative simulation of 4d Cities. 

- Meagher, Octre Encoding, 1980

  

  